Improve tutorial through "Defining the plugin structure" section (#4)
spyder-ide/spyder-api-docs: docs/plugin_development.rst

.. _tutorial-main:

###################################
Tutorial to develop a Spyder plugin
###################################

This tutorial aims to describe the features and possibilities of the API offered by `Spyder`_ to develop plugins and extend their functionality.
First, the tutorial lists the :ref:`tutorial-prereqs` to implement a plugin in Spyder.
Second, it describes the :ref:`tutorial-goals` that a participant can achieve.
Third, it includes a brief explanation of the :ref:`types of plugins <tutorial-plugin-concepts>` for Spyder and their benefits.
Fourth, it defines how to :ref:`set up an environment <tutorial-setup>` for plugin development.
Fifth, it explains the steps to build and publish a simple plugin.
:ref:`This plugin incorporates <tutorial-plugin-features>` a configurable Pomodoro timer in the status bar and some toolbar buttons to interact with it.

> Finally, the tutorial concludes highlighting the key points of developing plugins with Spyder to improve its maintenance and adaptability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial walks you through creating a Spyder plugin to add a configurable `Pomodoro Technique_` timer to the status bar and toolbar buttons to interact with it.
Along the way, we'll learn how to use Spyder's API to develop plugins and extend their functionality.

To do so, we'll:

#. List the :ref:`tutorial-prereqs` to implement a Spyder plugin.
#. Describe the :ref:`tutorial-goals` that a participant can achieve.
#. Explain the :ref:`types of Spyder plugins <tutorial-plugin-concepts>` and their benefits.
#. Define how to :ref:`set up an environment <tutorial-setup>` for plugin development.
#. Go through the steps to build and publish a simple plugin.
#. Finally, highlight the key points of developing maintainable, adaptable plugins with Spyder.
```

Before getting into anything else, IMO and per [Diataxis](https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/), we should state what the tutorial walks the user through doing. A tutorial first and foremost, 
 isn't a reference, explanation or promotional website describing the features and possibilities with a project, but rather walks the user through doing something specific and meaningful with it (with the secondary goal of better understanding the project as a whole, unlike a how-to). Therefore, I've moved the ancillary sentence below that states this to here.

Also, I've:
* Recast it into the friendlier "we" voice
* Added a paragraph break
* Used appropriate ordered-list structure to make it easier to navigate
* Reduced the overall verbosity
* Linked what Pomodoro is (which I neglected before)

> .. _Spyder: https://www.spyder-ide.org

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _website: https://www.spyder-ide.org
```

.. _tutorial-prereqs:

=============
Prerequisites
=============

You will need to have Spyder 5 installed.
Visit our :ref:`spyder:install-guide` for more information.

.. important::

>    Spyder now offers :ref:`spyder:install-standalone` for Windows and macOS, making it easier to get up and running with the application without having to download Anaconda or manually install it in your existing environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Spyder offers :ref:`spyder:install-standalone` for Windows, macOS and Linux, making it easier to get up and running with the application without having to download Anaconda or manually install it in your existing environment.
```

Update and perenialize language

>    However, readers of this tutorial should install Spyder using Anaconda or Miniconda, as standalone installers currently do not allow adding extra packages like the plugin we are going to develop in this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   However, for this tutorial Spyder should be installed using Anaconda or Miniconda, as standalone installers currently do not allow adding extra packages like the plugin we are going to develop.
```

Streamline the language a bit and avoid repetition

It is also desirable to have the following prior knowledge:

> * Basic level of Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Intermediate proficiency with Python.
```

Avoid repetition and be a little more accurate, since this requires at least basic knowledge of concepts many beginners (especially in scientific Python) may not know, like OOP/classes. Particularly given what follows this since no rank Python beginner is going to also know the basics of application development using Qt

  You can visit `The Python Tutorial`_ to learn the basics of this programming language.
* Basics of Qt application development using Python, either with `PyQt`_ or `PySide`_.

To quickly get started in desktop application development with Qt and Python, here is a set of open access resources:

> * `Tutorials Point - PyQt tutorial`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

TutorialsPoint is right now there with W3Schools and nearly as bad as Geeks4Geeks

.. _tutorial-main:

###################################
Tutorial to develop a Spyder plugin
###################################

> This tutorial walks you through creating a Spyder plugin to add a configurable `Pomodoro Technique_` timer to the status bar and toolbar buttons to interact with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial walks you through creating a Spyder plugin to add a configurable `Pomodoro Technique`_ timer to the status bar and toolbar buttons to interact with it.
```

Fix syntax error likely introduced in suggestion (despite my double-check before applying)

.. _Guru99 - PyQt tutorial: https://www.guru99.com/pyqt-tutorial.html
.. _Python GUIs - PyQt and PySide tutorials: https://www.pythonguis.com/

.. _tutorial-goals:

==============
Learning goals
==============

> By the end of this tutorial, participants will know:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the end of this tutorial, we'll learn:
```

We should use a consistent, friendly tone directly addressing the reader rather than clinical, detached language like this

* The basics of developing plugins for Spyder, and a general idea of its inner workings.
* The :ref:`types of plugins <tutorial-plugin-types>` that can be developed for Spyder.
* The :ref:`structure of a plugin <tutorial-structure-details>`, the :ref:`functionality <tutorial-plugin-features>` of its components, and how to extend its features.
* The way to package and publish a plugin so that it can be installed and used by others.

.. _tutorial-spyder-fundamentals:

===================
Spyder fundamentals
===================

> Before we dive into the formal explanation of Spyder plugins, let's briefly explain some Spyder basics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we dive into the formal explanation of Spyder plugins, let's briefly go over some Spyder basics.
```

Avoid intra-sentence word repetition

> Spyder is a powerful scientific desktop application written in Python that has specific features for data exploration, interactive execution, deep inspection, and graphical visualization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Spyder is a powerful scientific desktop application written in Python with features for data exploration, interactive execution, deep inspection, and graphical visualization.
```

More concise and clearer phrasing

> Spyder was developed in Qt, and requires for its operation two packages with which it is closely related (and without which it cannot work): `Spyder-Kernels`_ and `Python-LSP-Server`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Spyder uses Qt for its GUI, through the PyQt or PySide Python bindings via the `QtPy`_ abstraction layer:
```

* Clarify the relationship between Spyder and Qt
* Besides the tortured phrasing, since we decided not to describe these below since they aren't directly relevant to most plugins including the one here, its better not to mention them
* Instead, introduce a brief overview of the relationship between Qt, PyQt/PySide and QtPy before describing each in more detail below.

> * `Qt`_ is an open source multiplatform widget toolkit for creating native graphical user interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Qt`_ is an open source, multiplatform toolkit for creating graphical user interfaces.
```

Simplify this a bit and reduce the jargon density to make it easier for beginners to follow

>   Qt is a very complete development framework that offers utilities for building applications and has extensions for networking, Bluetooth, charts, 3D rendering, navigation (such as GPS), among others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It is a complete development framework that offers utilities for building applications and has extensions for networking, Bluetooth, charts, 3D rendering, and navigation, among others.
```

Avoid repetition of Qt, streamline a few unnecessary details and fix grammar/phrasing

> * Spyder uses `QtPy`_ which is an abstraction layer that allows you to work with Qt from Python regardless of whether you use one of the two reference libraries: PyQt or PySide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* PyQt and PySide are two different Python bindings for the C++-native Qt library, allowing Spyder to use Qt from Python.
* `QtPy`_ is an abstraction layer for PyQt and PySide, allowing Spyder to work with either one as well as multiple major Qt versions.
```

* Add a bullet for what PyQt and PySide are, which is otherwise never really explained here (which also makes the QtPy bullet less clear)

.. important::

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

To me at least, while this _is_ "important", it reads as rather odd to have this as a red "important" callout unrelated to the rest of the text. Instead, I suggest just making it part of the prose.

>    Spyder is currently being developed in such a way that most of its features are implemented as plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As for Spyder's own structure, all of its panes and nearly all its functionality is implemented as plugins.
This means the plugins you create can be just as powerful as Spyder's own internal components!
```

Rewrite very awkward and somewhat outdated prose, and make it sound more encouraging, friendly and relevant

If you are interested in learning more about Spyder's features, you can read about the project on `Spyder`_'s website.
If you are interested in contributing to Spyder, please visit the `contribution guide`_.

> .. _contribution guide: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about Spyder itself, check out the `website`_ and `documentation`_, and to contribute, read the `contributing guide`_!

.. _documentation: https://docs.spyder-ide.org
.. _contributing guide: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md
```

* Make this dramatically more concise and less repetitive
* Add link to Spyder's documentation

.. _Qt: https://www.qt.io/
.. _QtPy: https://github.com/spyder-ide/qtpy
.. _Spyder-Kernels: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder-kernels

> .. _Python-LSP-Server: https://github.com/python-lsp/python-lsp-server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Removed

.. _tutorial-plugin-concepts:

=========================
Developing Spyder plugins

> =========================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=====================
Basic plugin concepts
=====================
```

I find the current title rather unclear and non-specific; it makes it sound like this section starts developing the actual plugin rather than introduces the basic concepts. Therefore, I've changed it to be clearer.

> Now that we know a little bit about the basics of Spyder, it's time to dive into the heart of this tutorial: the plugins that can be developed in Spyder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we know a little bit about the basics of Spyder, let's go over the basics of Spyder plugins.
```

Rewrite wordy and awkward sentence, be clearer about what we're doing and use appropriate parallelism.

.. image:: images/workshop-3/pd_spyder_plugins.png
   :alt: Types of Spyder plugins

First, let's define what a plugin is.

> *A plugin is a component that adds functionality to an application; it can be a graphical component, for example, to display maps, or a non-graphical one that adds additional syntax coloring schemes.*

Reviewer: `[citation needed]`

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a8a2824e-5b3d-4a69-88cd-06862b4218da)

Reviewer: @ccordoba12

Author: I did not find the citation of the plugin definition. We have 2 options, remove the quotation marks and leave the definition as part of the tutorial or use a definition from an external source (e.g. Wikipedia).

Reviewer: As far as I can tell, despite appearing as a quote it is actually original to this document, as this page is itself the top hit on Google, DDG and Startpage when I searched for the sentence, with nothing else even that close.

Therefore, to avoid the misunderstanding in the first place, I suggest the straightforward syntax change:

```suggestion
A *plugin* is a component that adds functionality to an application; it can be a graphical component, for example, to display maps, or a non-graphical one that adds additional syntax highlighting schemes.
```

> In the case of Spyder, plugins are instances of Qt classes that modify Spyder's behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Spyder, plugins add new panes, new features, or otherwise modify Spyder's behavior.
```

Explains this in a much more practical and understandable way instead of highly abstract, technical jargon. Also improve phrasing and use more idiomatic English syntax

> Aside from a few fundamental components, most of Spyder's functionality arises from the interaction of plugins of two types: ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` and ``SpyderPluginV2``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from a few fundamental components, most of Spyder's functionality is implemented via plugins of two types: ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` and ``SpyderPluginV2``.
```

Use simpler and clearer langauge

.. _tutorial-plugin-types:
.. _tutorial-spyderdockableplugin:

SpyderDockablePlugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A plugin that works as a `QDockWidget`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A plugin with a dockable pane in the Spyder interface, implemented as a `QDockWidget`_.
```

Make clear in simple terms what this actually means instead of leading with highly technical terminology.

> This is a Qt class that provides a graphical control that can be docked inside a `QMainWindow`_ or floated as a top-level window on the desktop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a Qt class that provides a graphical widget that can be docked inside a `QMainWindow`_ or floated as a top-level window on the desktop.
```

Not sure what a better non-repetitive word is here, but "control" ain't it—it isn't just the control for the thing but the whole thing itself

.. topic:: ``SpyderDockablePlugin``

>    If we look at the Spyder interface, we can find a number of different panes on the right side (with the default layout), such as :guilabel:`Help`, :guilabel:`Variable Explorer`, :guilabel:`Plots`, :guilabel:`Files` and :guilabel:`History`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If we look at the Spyder interface, we can find a number of different panes (on the right side, with the default layout), such as :guilabel:`Help`, :guilabel:`Variable Explorer`, :guilabel:`Plots`, :guilabel:`Files` and :guilabel:`History`:
```

Slightly tweak the structure for clarity here; also needs colon if followed by bullets

   * Each of these panes is a ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` that offers an :guilabel:`Undock` option by clicking the hamburger menu button in the upper right corner.

>    * These plugins can also be hidden or shown via their entry in the :menuselection:`View --> Panes` menu, or using its corresponding keyboard shortcut displayed there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * These plugins can also be hidden or shown via their entry in the :menuselection:`View --> Panes` menu, or using their corresponding keyboard shortcut displayed there.
```

Fix singular/plural alignment

.. _QDockWidget: https://doc.qt.io/archives/qtforpython-5.12/PySide2/QtWidgets/QDockWidget.html
.. _QMainWindow: https://doc.qt.io/archives/qtforpython-5.12/PySide2/QtWidgets/QMainWindow.html

.. _tutorial-spyderpluginv2:

SpyderPluginV2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> It is a plugin that does not create a new dock widget on Spyder's main window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A plugin that does not create a new pane (``QDockWidget``) in Spyder's main window.
```

Use simpler, clearer and more consistent language and phrasing

In fact, ``SpyderPluginV2`` is the parent class of ``SpyderDockablePlugin``.

.. topic:: ``SpyderPluginV2``

>    High-level interface elements that do not offer an undocking option are basically instances of ``SpyderPluginV2``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   High-level interface elements that do not offer an undocking option are typically instances of ``SpyderPluginV2``.
```

Use more appropriate word here

>    These are typically used to handle more abstract functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   These are typically used to handle more abstract functionality:
```

Fix punctuation

>    * Examples of this are the *appearance* and *layout* plugins that manage Spyder's code color schemes and window layouts respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * Examples include the *appearance* and *layout* plugins that manage Spyder's syntax highlighting schemes and window layouts respectively.
```

Fix and refine the wording and phrasing here

   * Other examples of this type of plugins are the *main menu* and keyboard *shortcuts*.

>      Some graphical elements, such as the main toolbar and the status bar are also instances of the ``SpyderPluginV2`` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * Other examples of this type of plugins are the *main menu* and keyboard *shortcuts*.
   * Some graphical elements, such as the main toolbar and the status bar, are also instances of the ``SpyderPluginV2`` class.
```

No clear closer link between the final sentence and the previous one versus the first one, so made it a separate bullet too. Also fix a minor grammar issue

.. _tutorial-task-overview:

================
What will we do?
================

So far, we have :ref:`reviewed the concepts <tutorial-plugin-concepts>` necessary to create your first plugin.
In this section, first, we :ref:`explain the Pomodoro technique <tutorial-pomodoro-technique>` that will be implemented for time management in the plugin.
Second, we describe the :ref:`steps to develop the plugin <tutorial-plugin-steps>`.

> Finally, we :ref:`present the main features <tutorial-plugin-features>` that will be displayed in Spyder once the plugin is developed and published.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we:

#. :ref:`Explain the Pomodoro technique <tutorial-pomodoro-technique>` that will be implemented for time management in the plugin.
#. Describe the :ref:`steps to develop the plugin <tutorial-plugin-steps>`.
#. :ref:`Present the main features <tutorial-plugin-features>` that will be displayed in Spyder once the plugin is developed and published.
```

Use appropriate ordered list construct here

.. _tutorial-pomodoro-technique:

Pomodoro Technique
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `Pomodoro Technique`_, designed by Francesco Cirillo, is a time management practice used to increase concentration and productivity when completing tasks or meeting deadlines.
Using a Pomodoro timer can help you pay attention to a task.

.. image:: images/workshop-3/pd_pomodoro_timer.png
   :alt: Description of the pomodoro technique

The typical process of the Pomodoro technique consists of the following six steps:

1. Choose a task to be done.
2. Set the Pomodoro timer (default is 25 minutes).
3. Work only on that task until the timer ends.

> 4. Put a check mark on a piece of paper when the timer rings; this is called "a pomodoro".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Put a check mark on a piece of paper when the timer rings; this is called a "pomodoro".
```

Slight syntax tweak

5. If you have fewer than 3 check marks, take a short break (by default, 5 minutes), and go back to step 2.
6. When you have completed four Pomodoro cycles, you deserve a longer break (our default is 15 minutes).
   The check marks are reset to zero; return to step 1.

.. _Pomodoro Technique: https://www.pomodorotechnique.com/

.. _tutorial-plugin-steps:

Steps to develop a plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These are the general steps that we will follow throughout this tutorial:

* Select the most suitable :ref:`plugin type <tutorial-plugin-types>` and :ref:`create its initial structure <tutorial-plugin-structure>` using `Cookiecutter`_.
* Install the plugin in development mode in the :ref:`virtual environment <tutorial-environment>` from which we run Spyder.
* Implement the functionality of our plugin using the Spyder classes and following the guidelines indicated in the :ref:`plugin structure <tutorial-structure-details>`.

> * Build a configuration page for our plugin, which would appear in :menuselection:`Tools --> Preferences`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Build a configuration page for our plugin (if needed), which will appear in :menuselection:`Tools --> Preferences`.
```

Slighly clarify language here

.. _tutorial-plugin-features:

Features
~~~~~~~~

> Up to this point, we are clear on the concepts related to the Pomodoro Technique and the steps to develop a Spyder plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Up to this point, we've gone over the Pomodoro Technique and the steps to develop a Spyder plugin.
```

Simplify the phrasing and don't presume the reader's state of mind

> Now, we present a minimal plan to identify the features that will be displayed in Spyder once the plugin is implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we identify the features that will be displayed in Spyder once the plugin is implemented.
```

Elide extra words that obscure meaning rather than clarify it

   :alt: figure2

   Figure 2: Spyder Pomodoro Timer in the preferences window.

.. _tutorial-feature-explanation:

* Pomodoro Timer

  - *Status bar widget*.
    Used to display the time of the current pomodoro interval.
  - *State*.
    We have three activity states: ``pomodoro``, ``short-break`` and ``long-break``.
    We can show a message (with `QMessageBox`_) to indicate to users that it is time to take a break.
  - *Interactions*.
    The user can use :guilabel:`Start`, :guilabel:`Stop` and :guilabel:`Reset` buttons to operate the pomodoro timer.
    This could be implemented by adding instances of `QAction`_ in a toolbar menu.
  - *Preferences*.
    An option will be implemented in the preferences window to set the time limits of the pomodoro timer.

* Tasks Logger

  - *Counter*.
    A variable is needed to count the number of completed pomodoros.

* Notifications

  - *Dialog*.
    Each time a pomodoro or break interval is completed, a message should appear to tell the user to start working on a task or take a break.

  When working on a plugin for any system, we must check the data structures and functions available in that system that can facilitate our development.

>   This involves spending considerable time understanding its inner workings.

Reviewer: This statement appears rather out of the blue and disconnected from everything else, with no clear lead-in or follow-up. Therefore, I'm unclear what to do with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

.. _QMessageBox: https://doc.qt.io/archives/qtforpython-5.12/PySide2/QtWidgets/QMessageBox.html

.. _tutorial-setup:

=======================
Development environment
=======================

> This section describes two main tasks for plugin development: :ref:`tutorial-environment` and :ref:`tutorial-repo` to manage code changes and its versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes two main tasks for plugin development: :ref:`tutorial-environment` and :ref:`tutorial-repo` to manage code changes and versions.
```

Remove ungrammatical and unnecessary pronoun

.. _tutorial-environment:

Setting up the development environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In principle, we could use any Spyder installed within a `conda environment`_ according to the instructions given in the :ref:`spyder:install-guide`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In principle, we could use any copy of Spyder within a `conda environment`_ installed as described in the :ref:`spyder:install-guide`.
```

Use clearer and less repetitive language

However, if you use a working environment that has other dependencies and you want to keep your plugin development independent of them, we recommend creating a new virtual environment that only has Spyder with the minimum dependencies needed for your plugin.

.. image:: images/workshop-3/pd_dev_environment.png
   :alt: Spyder development environment

> We can install it in the following way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can install it using the following system terminal commands (in the Anaconda Prompt, on Windows):
```

Clarify what this is and where the user is expected to enter them

.. code-block:: shell

   conda activate base
   conda install -c conda-forge mamba  # A personal recommendation
   mamba create -n spyder-dev -c conda-forge python=3
   mamba activate spyder-dev

>    mamba install spyder

Reviewer: Mamba isn't just recommended but required for the following commands. Since it complicates the tutorial and Conda now defaults to libmamba anyway, I suggest removing that part. In addition, specifying the dependencies initially results in a faster and more stable solve, as well as is simpler. It also avoids forgetting to specify Conda-Forge again leading to possible mixe channels. Therefore, we can do that with just:

```suggestion
   conda create -n spyder-dev -c conda-forge spyder
   conda activate spyder-dev
```

.. note::

>    * `Anaconda`_ is a Python distribution for data science and machine learning to be used in a single machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * `Miniforge`_ is a Python distribution for data science and machine learning, similar to Anaconda except without all the glut of packages installed by default (which won't be used here).
```

For the reasons specified (and that we're well aware), it makes much more sense to use Miniforgerather than Anaconda here

>    * `Conda`_ is an Anaconda tool that manages virtual environments and their packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * `Conda`_ is an open source tool that manages virtual environments and their packages.
```

Conda is not specific to Anaconda

   * Conda can work with *channels* that allow the use of packages that are not part of the official distribution.
     The most important channel is `conda-forge`_, where a more extensive and updated list of packages is maintained than those offered by Anaconda itself.

>    * Finally, `Mamba`_, is an optimized implementation of Conda's package management features, which resolves dependencies and installs packages much faster than Conda.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Not relevant/extra complexity for this tutorial

.. _conda environment: https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/concepts/environments.html

> .. _Anaconda: https://www.anaconda.com/download

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _Miniforge: https://conda-forge.org/download/
```

Also, apparently you now have to provide Anaconda personal information (email address, at least) before downloading even Miniconda. Maybe we should officially recommend Miniforge instead which would dispense with the step of setting the Conda-Forge channel also and avoid mistakes.

.. _Conda: https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/
.. _conda-forge: https://conda-forge.org/

> .. _Mamba: https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

.. _tutorial-repo:

Creating a repository
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now that we have our local virtual environment, it is good practice to manage our source code with a version control system, and the most widely used web service for this purpose is currently GitHub.

> Here you can find, for example, the Spyder and Python repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have our local virtual environment, it is good practice to manage our source code with a version control system.
By far the most widely used VCS is `Git`_, and the most popular web hosting service for Git is `GitHub`_.
You can find the `Spyder repository`_ on GitHub, and download (or ``clone``) it with Git.

.. _Git: https://git-scm.com
.. _GitHub: https://github.com
.. _Spyder repository: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder
```

Clarify and explain the tools being used here and the relationship between them, link them, and avoid common harmful misconceptions./

.. image:: images/workshop-3/pd_github_repo.png
   :alt: Git and GitHub repository concepts

To create a Git repository on GitHub, we need to follow these steps:

> #. Log in to your GitHub account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Log in to your GitHub account (or create one if you don't have one already).
```

#. Click on the :guilabel:`New repository` option in the :guilabel:`+` menu at the top right next to your profile picture.

> #. A dialog will appear where you can insert the repository name and some basic options, e.g.
> to initialize the repository with a README or license files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Type the repository name in the resulting dialog and select the options you want (e.g. whether to initialize the repository with a README or license files).
```

Fix syntax error, clarify this and rewrite it to be consistent in phrasing with the others

#. Click the :guilabel:`Create repository` button.

#. In the main window of the newly created repository, click on the green :guilabel:`Code` button and copy the clone link.

#. On your local command line, run ``git clone <repo-link>``.
   You must have Git installed and configured on your computer.
   If you have no experience using Git, we recommend The Carpentries workshop `Version Control with Git`_.

You can find a detailed description of `creating repositories`_ in the official GitHub documentation, and a `Hello World tutorial`_ with basic Git operations from the GitHub interface.

.. _Version Control with Git: https://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/
.. _creating repositories: https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/creating-and-managing-repositories/quickstart-for-repositories
.. _Hello World tutorial: https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/start-your-journey/hello-world

.. _tutorial-plugin-structure:

=============================
Defining the plugin structure
=============================

We already have :ref:`a Git repository <tutorial-repo>` and :ref:`a virtual environment <tutorial-environment>` where Spyder 5 is installed.

> Let's activate our environment and go into the local folder of our repository:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's activate our environment in the system terminal (Anaconda Prompt for Windows) and navigate into the root folder of our repository:
```

Be more clear about where to do this and what we're doing

.. code-block:: shell

>    mamba activate spyder-dev

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   conda activate spyder-dev
```

Use Conda per the above

>    cd /path/to/your/repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   cd path/to/your/repository
```

Make non-absolute path

.. _tutorial-cookiecutter:

Then we need to use `Cookiecutter`_ to create the :ref:`initial structure <tutorial-structure-details>` of our plugin.

> Cookiecutter is a tool made in Python specifically designed to create project templates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cookiecutter is a tool implemented in Python specifically designed to create project skeletons.
```

Clarify some language—in this case, users aren't using it to create the original template but rather to produce the skeleton _from_ a template.

   │       └── widgets.py
   └── tests

In the root folder you'll find two important files:

> * The Makefile, which has several useful commands:

Reviewer: Definitely going to have to update this old stuff with our standardized Noxfile at some point

  .. code-block:: text

     clean                remove all build, test, coverage and Python artifacts
     clean-build          remove build artifacts
     clean-pyc            remove Python file artifacts
     clean-test           remove test and coverage artifacts
     test                 run tests quickly with the default Python
     docs                 generate Sphinx HTML documentation, including API docs
     servedocs            compile the docs watching for changes
     release              package and upload a release
     dist                 builds source and wheel package
     install              install the package to the active Python's site-packages
     develop              install the package to the active Python's site-packages

* ``setup.py``.
  It helps you install, package and distribute your plugin with Setuptools, the standard for distributing Python packages.

>   In this file the ``entry_points`` parameter of ``setup`` is quite important, as it is what allows Spyder to identify this package as a plugin, and know how to access its functionality.

Reviewer: Will update this outdated packaging stuff in a separate PR, after I also update the template

> The ``spyder-pomodoro-timer`` folder has the same name you entered when you ran ``cookiecutter``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The folder for ``spyder-pomodoro-timer`` has the project name you entered when you ran ``cookiecutter``.
```

I was very confused by the original once I read it more closely. Hopefully I've interpreted it correctly here.

> Inside it you will see a folder called ``spyder``, where we will place the code of our plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside it we should see a folder called ``spyder``, where we will place the code of our plugin.
```

For consistancy

In the ``spyder`` directory you'll find the following files:

* ``api.py``.

>   Exposes the functionality of the plugin to the rest of Spyder.
>   That allows adding additional functionality from other plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Exposes the functionality of the plugin to the rest of Spyder, allowing other plugins to build on top of it in turn.
```

I found the rewritten form confusing and less clear, as well as more choppy, but I think I've been able to restore that.

* ``plugin.py``.
  This is the core of the plugin.
  Depending on the type of plugin created, you will see an instance of either ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` or ``SpyderPluginV2``.

  * If it is a ``SpyderPluginV2`` you should set a constant class named ``CONTAINER_CLASS`` with an instance of ``PluginMainContainer``.

>   * If it is a ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` you should set a constant class named ``WIDGET_CLASS`` with an instance of ``PluginMainWidget``.

Reviewer: The language leaves me a little confused about what to do here. An example would go a long way.

Reviewer 2: What do you have in mind? An example in the Spyder code?

Reviewer: Just an example of what this should look like in `plugin.py`. E.g. (just guessing at the interpretation)

```python
# plugin.py
CONTAINER_CLASS = spyder.<...>.PluginMainContainer
```

Reviewer 2: Ok, in that case it should be something like

```python
from spyder.api.plugins import SpyderPluginV2
from my_plugin.spyder.container import MyContainer

class MyPlugin(SpyderPluginV2):

    CONTAINER_CLASS = MyContainer
```

Reviewer: Thanks! Making that a suggestion:

```suggestion
  * If it is a ``SpyderPluginV2`` you should set a constant class named ``CONTAINER_CLASS`` with an instance of ``PluginMainContainer``.
  * If it is a ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` you should set a constant class named ``WIDGET_CLASS`` with an instance of ``PluginMainWidget``.
  
  For example:
  
  .. code-block:: python
     
     # plugin.py
     from spyder.api.plugins import SpyderPluginV2
     from my_plugin.spyder.container import MyContainer

     class MyPlugin(SpyderPluginV2):
         CONTAINER_CLASS = MyContainer
```

* ``container.py``.

>   It is only used for ``SpyderPluginV2`` plugins.
>   This file contains an instance of ``PluginMainContainer``, which contains a reference to all graphical elements (or widgets) that the plugin will add to the interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Only used for ``SpyderPluginV2`` plugins, this file has an instance of ``PluginMainContainer`` that contains references to all graphical elements (or widgets) your plugin will add to the interface.
```

Clarified the somewhat confusing and choppy language some

  This is necessary because Qt requires widgets to be children of other widgets before using them (otherwise they appear as floating windows).

>   Since ``SpyderPluginV2`` is not a widget, we need a data structure (i.e. the container) that is a widget for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Since ``SpyderPluginV2`` is not a widget, the container (which is a widget) serves this role for us.
```

I found the existing text very confusing, so after some parsing and thought I rewrote it like this

* ``widgets.py``.
  Contains the graphical components of our plugin.
  If the plugin is of type ``SpyderPluginV2`` and it does not have widgets, then it is not needed.

>   If the plugin is of type ``SpyderDockablePlugin``, this is where we can place the instance of ``PluginMainWidget`` that is needed for it.

Reviewer: ```rst
  For ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` or a ``SpyderPluginV2`` with widgets, the required instance of ``PluginMainWidget`` goes here.
  Not needed for a ``SpyderPluginV2`` without widgets.
```

Again, found this unnecessarily complex and somewhat confusing. I think I've interpreted it correctly here.

Reviewer 2: Counterproposal, with some minor fixes:

```rst
  For a ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` or a ``SpyderPluginV2`` with widgets, the required instance of ``PluginMainWidget`` goes here.
  But it's not needed for a ``SpyderPluginV2`` without widgets.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This not needed for a ``SpyderPluginV2`` without widgets.
  For ``SpyderPluginV2`` with widgets or a ``SpyderDockablePlugin``, the required instance of ``PluginMainWidget`` goes here.
```

Fixed an incomplete sentence issue with the above and also re-ordered the sentences and clauses to be more clear and unambiguous.

* ``confpage.py``.

>   It includes the specific configuration page that will be displayed in :guilabel:`Preferences`, so that the user can adjust the options of our plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Includes the configuration page that will be displayed in :guilabel:`Preferences`, so that the user can adjust the options of our plugin.
```

Reviewer 2: Why not start this sentence with `it`?

Reviewer: To match the previous ("Contains the...", etc.) and the general form of this type of list

     develop              install the package to the active Python's site-packages

* ``setup.py``.
  It helps you install, package and distribute your plugin with Setuptools, the standard for distributing Python packages.
  In this file the ``entry_points`` parameter of ``setup`` is quite important, as it is what allows Spyder to identify this package as a plugin, and know how to access its functionality.

The folder for ``spyder-pomodoro-timer`` has the project name you entered when you ran ``cookiecutter``.
Inside it we should see a folder called ``spyder``, where we will place the code of our plugin.

In the ``spyder`` directory you'll find the following files:

* ``api.py``.
  Exposes the functionality of the plugin to the rest of Spyder, allowing other plugins to build on top of it in turn.

* ``plugin.py``.
  This is the core of the plugin.
  Depending on the type of plugin created, you will see an instance of either ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` or ``SpyderPluginV2``.

  * If it is a ``SpyderPluginV2`` you should set a constant class named ``CONTAINER_CLASS`` with an instance of ``PluginMainContainer``.

>   * If it is a ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` you should set a constant class named ``WIDGET_CLASS`` with an instance of ``PluginMainWidget``.
>   
>   For example:
>   
>   .. code-block:: python
>      
>      # plugin.py
>      from spyder.api.plugins import SpyderPluginV2
>      from my_plugin.spyder.container import MyContainer
> 
>      class MyPlugin(SpyderPluginV2):
>          CONTAINER_CLASS = MyContainer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * If it is a ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` you should set a constant class named ``WIDGET_CLASS`` with an instance of ``PluginMainWidget``.

  For example, with a ``SpyderPluginV2``:

  .. code-block:: python

     # plugin.py
     from spyder.api.plugins import SpyderPluginV2
     from my_plugin.spyder.container import MyContainer

     class MyPlugin(SpyderPluginV2):
         CONTAINER_CLASS = MyContainer
```

Fix spurious trailing spaces—made sure this didn't happen elsewhere, just missed a spot here.

Also, clarify that the example is for a ``SpyderPluginV2``
